To select all columns and rows from the employees table:

SELECT * FROM employees;
This will retrieve all columns and rows from the employees table.

To select only the name and salary columns of all employees with a salary greater than 50000:

SELECT name, salary FROM employees WHERE salary > 50000;
This will retrieve the name and salary columns of all employees with a salary greater than 50000.

To calculate the average salary of all employees:

SELECT AVG(salary) FROM employees;
This will calculate the average salary of all employees.

To count the number of employees who work in the "Marketing" department:

SELECT COUNT(*) FROM employees WHERE department_id = (SELECT id FROM departments WHERE name = 'Marketing');
This will count the number of employees who work in the "Marketing" department.

To update the salary column of the employee with an id of 1001 to 60000:

UPDATE employees SET salary = 60000 WHERE id = 1001;
This will update the salary column of the employee with an id of 1001 to 60000.
To delete all employees whose salary is less than 30000:

DELETE FROM employees WHERE salary < 30000;
This will delete all employees whose salary is less than 30000.

To select all columns and rows from the departments table:

SELECT * FROM departments;
This will retrieve all columns and rows from the departments table.

To select only the name and manager columns of the "Finance" department:

SELECT name, manager FROM departments WHERE name = 'Finance';
This will retrieve the name and manager columns of the "Finance" department.

To calculate the total number of employees in each department:

SELECT departments.name, COUNT(employees.id) as total_employees FROM departments INNER JOIN employees ON departments.id = employees.department_id GROUP BY departments.name;
This will calculate the total number of employees in each department.
To insert a new department called "Research" with a manager named "John Doe":

INSERT INTO departments (name, manager) VALUES ('Research', 'John Doe');
This will insert a new department called "Research" with a manager named "John Doe".

Explanation of each SQL command and its purpose:
This command retrieves all columns and rows from the employees table.
This command retrieves only the name and salary columns of all employees with a salary greater than 50000.
This command calculates the average salary of all employees.
This command counts the number of employees who work in the "Marketing" department.
This command updates the salary column of the employee with an id of 1001 to 60000.
This command deletes all employees whose salary is less than 30000.
This command retrieves all columns and rows from the departments table.
This command retrieves only the name and manager columns of the "Finance" department.
This command calculates the total number of employees in each department.
This command inserts a new department called "Research" with a manager named "John Doe".

